{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red164\green8\blue0;\red217\green11\blue0;}
\vieww25100\viewh14200\viewkind0
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural

\f0\fs32 \cf0 From: Current Biology Editorial Office <em@editorialmanager.com>\
Subject: CURRENT-BIOLOGY-D-15-01322 - Editorial Decision\
Date: 28 October 2015 00:21:31 GMT\
To: Thomas Guillerme <guillert@tcd.ie>\
Reply-To: Current Biology Editorial Office <current-biology@cell.com>\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural

\f1 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Dear Mr Guillerme,\
\
Your paper "Mammalian morphological diversity does not increase in response to the Cretaceous-Paleogene mass extinction." has now been seen by the referees, their comments follow below. \
\
As you will see, all our referees raise substantive concerns regarding the strength of the evidence supporting your claims. In the light of these, we cannot offer to publish your paper in Current Biology. Given the comments of our referees I am afraid we are not persuaded that the advance you report is substantial enough to justify publication in Current Biology rather than a more specialised journal. \
\
I am sorry that, on this occasion, we cannot give you a more positive response, and hope that you find our referees comments helpful in preparing a revised version of your paper for submission elsewhere.\
\
Regards,\
\
Florian Maderspacher\
\
______________________________________________\
Dr. Florian Maderspacher\
\
Senior Editor\
Current Biology\
\
360 Park Avenue South\
New York, NY 10010\
USA\
\
current-biology.com\
@CurrentBiology\
______________________________________________\
\
Reviewer #1: This paper concerns a debate that has been raging among some paleontologists for the last decade: when did mammals diversify and what role did the end-Cretaceous extinction play in this story? This paper therefore has the potential to add important new information to a hot field, and in particular, is one of the first studies to calculate disparity (morphological diversity) for mammals across the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary (i.e., across the extinction). For these reasons I was very excited to read this paper. However, I feel that it has fundamental flaws that preclude it from being published.\
\
These flaws have to do with the datasets used.\cf2  I want to state upfront that the methods the authors use are suitable\cf0 . In fact, they are more than that: \cf3 the authors present novel methods for time slicing disparity measures and using gradual evolutionary models to calculate disparity measures\cf0 . I found these methods to be very interesting, and I think they have great potential for expanding the toolkit that paleobiologists use to study morphological evolution over time. These new methods deserve to be published, and the authors should be congratulated on advancing the state-of-the-art and pulling the field in a new direction. If this was simply a methods paper, which used theoretical datasets (or perhaps different empirical datasets) to present the new methods and show how they are superior to previous methods, I would be giving a ringing endorsement and recommending publication with very minor changes. \
\
But the issue here concerns the two mammal datasets the authors are using to address the two fundamental questions they are after: 1) how did mammal disparity change as a result of the end-Cretaceous extinction? 2) how has mammal disparity changed from the Mesozoic until the present day? Neither dataset is suitable for these two questions. It pains me to say this, but the results the authors are getting are surely due to a 'garbage in, garbage out' type of problem. The authors are both excellent quantitative paleobiologists and superstars when it comes to methods, but it seems to me like they do not fully understand the realities and limitations of the datasets, which they took from the literature and did not compile themselves.\
\
Here are the two main problems:\
\
1) Paleocene taxon sampling: If you want to understand what influence the end-Cretaceous extinction had on mammals, calculating the disparity of species from the Paleocene (the time interval immediately after the end-Cretaceous extinction) is critical. The authors say so themselves on page 12: \'a0"Therefore, an effect of the K-Pg boundary would be more likely to be detected during the Paleogene when mammalian diversity was highest." But their datasets are woefully inadequate and the authors do not seem to realize this fundamental flaw. There are over 200 known species of Paleocene mammals, and this roster is growing yearly. However, the Mammaliformes dataset the authors use includes only three Paleocene species, and the Eutheria dataset includes only 15 Paleocene species. This lack of sampling is clearly illustrated in Figure 1: the dotted lines (which indicate the total numbers of species/nodes for each time interval) take a huge dip in the Paleocene in the Mammaliaformes\
dataset, and the Paleocene lines are much lower than the Cretaceous lines in the Eutheria dataset. The Eutheria dataset exhibits a peak in taxon sampling in the latest Cretaceous, but this should not be: there are only about 40 total Cretaceous eutherian genera that have been found, compared with roughly 200 from the Paleocene (see the compilation of McKenna & Bell 1997 and Rose 2006). What this means is that these datasets are severely unevenly sampled. And that makes sense, because each was compiled originally to study the phylogenetic relationships of Triassic-Cretaceous mammals and their close relatives (not post-Cretaceous mammals, a few of which were added later to each dataset by subsequent authors) and the origination time of placental mammals. As somebody who deals with Paleocene mammal fossils on a regular basis (finding them in the field, describing them, working on their phylogeny), there is no doubt that there is a huge explosion in mammal diversity and\
disparity after the end-Cretaceous extinction. Why? Because all sorts of remarkable mammals start to show up in the fossil record: the beaver-like taeniolabidoid multituberculates, the burrowing taeniodonts, the buck-toothed tillodonts, the cow-sized herbivorous pantodonts, the enormous diversity of condylarths (periptychids, hyopsodontids, arctocyonids, phenacodontids, mioclaenids, etc.), the garish uintatheres, the ferocious triisodontids and mesonychids, the great diversity of the small shrew-like cimolestids, etc. And these are just the so-called 'archaic' Paleocene mammals: the ones that we can't easily fit into the family tree. There are also all sorts of early members of the modern mammal groups that start showing up in the later Paleocene, and then particularly around the PETM. Not a single one of these animals is included in the Mammaliaformes dataset (merely three Paleocene metatherians), and only a few of these are included in the Eutheria dataset. I'm sorry\'97I\
just cannot accept any study that tries to interpret evolutionary changes across the Cretaceous-Paleocene that includes such a tiny amount of data from the Paleocene. In fact, I would bet that if these Paleocene taxa were properly included, then the Paleocene disparity number would shoot right up and would be hugely significantly higher than the Cretaceous value. How could it not be, given the remarkable diversity of new mammals that appear in the Paleocene? And some preliminary studies bear this out: \cf3 both some of my own work (with Tom Williamson, Michelle Spaulding, John Wible, and our students that we have started to present at SVP) and the in press study of Halliday, Upchurch, and Goswami (Biological Journal of the Linnean Society), which includes a bunch of Paleocene taxa in a dataset , calculates disparity, and finds a significantly higher value in the Paleocene compared to the Cretaceous. \cf0 \
\
2) More modern taxon sampling: The authors find that Mammaliaformes reached high disparity in the Middle Triassic and then plateaued for the remainder of their history, until the present day. For Eutheria, they found that disparity reached a plateau at the end of the Jurassic. The authors are basically saying that mammals became really morphologically diverse early in their history and then remained fairly static. This just simply doesn't pass the smell test: the authors are saying that Mesozoic mammal faunas comprised of a limited number of small species were as morphologically diverse as today's 5000+ mammal species that includes everything from bats and whales to mice and humans. The reason they are finding this result is because their datasets include very few modern mammal species, or indeed, very few mammal species that lived past the Eocene (ca. 34 million years ago). The Mammaliaformes dataset includes 22 modern mammals, two of which are monotremes, 12 of which are\
marsupials, and eight of which are placentals (armadillo, anteater, sloth, rabbit, rodent, hedgehog, cat, dog). The Eutheria dataset includes only 14 modern mammals, three of which are marsupials and 11 of which are placentals (tenrec, otter shew, elephant shrew, aardvark, manatee, hyrax, flying lemur, tree shrew, Solenodon, hedgehog, shrew). \'a0In other words, the authors are sampling less than 0.5 percent of modern mammals. Missing from their dataset are things like bats, whales, elephants, monkeys, seals, bears, humans, and ungulates. Not only that, but the numerous morphological characters relating to these animals and their incredible diversity are also missing. This is why the disparity of modern mammals is statistically indistinct from the disparity of Mesozoic mammals: because these datasets are full of Mesozoic mammals (that is why they were originally constructed, to elucidate the phylogeny of these mammals) and basically devoid of modern mammals. The authors do make\
an attempt to factor out sample size biases by subsampling, but for both this problem and the Paleocene problem above this is not going to cut it. To do this right you would need to subsample from a representative sample of post-Cretaceous mammals and their anatomical characters. Subsampling from such a small, compromised sample isn't going to do anything. This issue is neatly summed up by a statement made by the authors, which is visually shown in Figure 1: "In Mammaliaformes the number of tips and nodes in each time subsample steadily increases until the Middle Jurassic then randomly fluctuates during the rest of the Mesozoic and the Cenozoic. In Eutheria, the number of tips and nodes increases up to the K-Pg boundary and then decreases throughout the Cenozoic." This throws up an immediate red flag, because there is no doubt that mammalian species richness has increased tremendously from the Mesozoic to today's world, yet the authors' datasets actually have fewer and fewer\
mammals as you get progressively closer to the present. These datasets just simply are not adequate for measuring the morphological disparity of post-Cretaceous mammals, particularly modern mammals. No amount of statistical rigor or analytical brilliance will remedy this problem.\
\
Those are my main criticisms, but I also have a few other suggestions:\
\
1) Page 9: "Our results imply that mammals did not diversify morphologically in response to the K-Pg extinction event. Instead, their diversification appears to have begun before the end of the Cretaceous." As I outline above, the datasets are not suitable for addressing this question. But let's say they were, and the authors still found raw values of morphological disparity to be static across the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary. That would not necessarily mean that mammals did not diversify morphologically in response to the K-Pg. You could still have a case where a diverse array of Cretaceous mammals died out and then a new diverse array of Paleocene mammals evolved to take their place. Both sets may have equal or near-equal overall disparity, but would occupy different regions of morphospace and different positions in the phylogeny. This would be extreme morphological change due to the K-Pg, yet if you only look at the overall disparity values you would miss it. To put it\
extremely: no way that bats, whales, and elephants are filling the same morphological space as Cretaceous mammals! So showing a morphospace is essential here. I am curious as to why the authors did not do so, as they ordinated morphospaces as part of their analytical procedure. I would recommend that a morphospace figure be front and center in the main text. \
\
2) Page 5: "We can instead use morphological diversity, also known as disparity (e.g. [35]), as a way to quantify changes in mammalian morphology that should relate to the ecology of the species."\
\
Using morphological data as a proxy for ecological disparity is controversial. Anderson and Friedman (2012, JVP) showed why the two don't always correlate, and gave many caveats for using morphological data as an indicator of ecological diversity. Conversely, the study of Grossnickle et al. (2013, Proceedings B) is a true ecological diversity study, as it uses various anatomical characters that are known to relate to mammalian dietary ecology. I would recommend caution: if you want to do an ecological diversity study, use methods like those of Grossnickle. Otherwise, just call your study what it is: a morphological disparity study.\
\
3) Page 11-12: The authors said the limited taxonomic sample of their dataset "might not cause a serious underestimation of disparity (after the Cretaceous), at least for the Mammaliaformes, because their diversity peaked during the late Cretaceous." This is simply incorrect. There are 5000+ species of modern mammaliaformes: today's mammals. There were not more than 5000 species during any one time interval of the Cretaceous, at least as far as we know from fossils. I hate to be blunt, but this statement shows to me that the authors fundamentally misunderstand their datasets and the limitations of these datasets.\
\
4) Page 18, Calculating Disparity: The authors argue against using the four standard disparity metrics often employed in the literature: the sum and products of ranges and variances in morphospace/cladisto-space. I understand the issues with both range metrics: they are dependent on sample size (as are all range metrics), so can be easily affected by sampling biases. I understand the issues with both product metrics: with small ranges and variances on the final axes, the product measures will tend towards zero. But I do not understand what the problem is with the single metric left standing: the sum of the variances. This still seems to be pretty robust to me. This should be discussed, particularly as a major part of this paper is the authors presenting new methods that are held to be superior to everything that has been done previously. (This is not to say that I do not like the median distance metric with the authors use; I think it is a good one if you want to measure\
disparity as the spread of taxa in morphospace).\
\
So in summary: I think the authors have done amazing and ground-breaking statistical work, and their methods are very promising and possibly will become standards in the field. They are excellent statisticians and analytical paleobiologists, and I once again compliment them on the new tools they developed. However, the datasets they are using are simply inadequate for studying how mammal morphological disparity changed across the K-Pg, and how Mesozoic mammals were different from today's mammals. For this reason I cannot recommend publication of this paper. And I also note that, as much as I hate to say it, this isn't a problem that is easily remedied: it will take many years and a lot of hands-on-the-fossils work to build a big dataset that properly combines Mesozoic, Paleocene, and more modern mammals. Many of us are starting to work on this, and presenting our results in initial papers and SVP presentations, but we're not there yet. So I recommend that the authors publish\
their new methods by using more suitable datasets. For example, they could limit their analyses to Mesozoic mammals, as both of their datasets were constructed originally to focus on Mesozoic mammals. That would remove the high-impact implications of the end-Cretaceous extinction, but it would allow them to present their methods on more solid footing.\
\
Steve Brusatte, Univ of Edinburgh, October 21, 2015\
\
\
Reviewer #2: Guillerme and Cooper attempt to quantify temporal patterns of morphological disparity in mammals across the K-Pg to infer the effect that the mass-extinction had on the evolution of this group. To this end, datasets of discrete morphological characters (cladistic matrices) derived from two previously-published total-evidence tip-dating studies are analysed in a phylogenetic framework, using a new approach for calculating temporal patterns of disparity with discrete data that avoids the use of time-bins.\
\
The authors obtain the surprising and counter-intuitive result that morphological disparity remained unchanged across the K-Pg and remained flat well into the Cenozoic, despite the thoroughly well-documented large-scale adaptive radiation of placentals and marsupials (both in terms of their taxonomic diversification and obvious, dramatic ecological differentiation) in the aftermath of the end-Cretaceous extinction. Such conclusions demand very compelling evidence. Unfortunately, I do not think that such evidence is presented.\
\
Much is made of the study's use of total evidence phylogenies. The authors claim that the current debate concerning the timing of the divergence of placental mammals is due to conflicting signals present in palaeontological and 'neontological' data. Reading the fossil record at face value suggests that placentals diversified exclusively after the K-Pg, as there are few if any incontrovertible representatives of the extant placental orders known from the Cretaceous. By contrast, 'neontological' data --- molecular time-trees --- generally suggest an origin for Placentalia in the mid- to Late Cretaceous. However, it is incorrect to refer to these molecular clock studies as 'neontological', as they rely heavily on fossil calibrations, and thus incorporate both types of data.\
\
With this in mind, we can assess the author's assertion that the problem can be solved by analysing both palaeontological and neontological data. Phylogenies inferred using total-evidence tip-dating methods (incorporating morphological, molecular and stratigraphic/fossil data in a single inferrential framework) are presented as giving "more accurate estimates of diversification times for both living and fossil species." This approach is undoubtedly conceptually more attractive than the tried-and-tested node-calibrated molecular clock techniques, but it is incorrect to state that the divergence times are "more accurate." In fact, most early results from this comparatively young and immature methodology suggest that total-evidence tip-dating methods infer unrealistically ancient divergence times, particularly \'a0further down the tree (see, for example, Arcila et al. 2015 in MPE vol 82, on tetraodontiform fishes). Given that the disagreement between palaeontological and\
'neontological' data stems from the antiquity of the divergences inferred by molecular clock analyses, tip-dating certainly isn't "more accurate." Temporal patterns of morphological disparity inferred in a phylogenetic framework, using trees obtained by these methods, will be particularly strongly hampered by such uncertainties.\
\
The present study does not produce the total-evidence tip-dating analyses; they are derived from previous studies, and most of the novelty and insight into the pattern of mammalian evolution over the K-Pg is contained in the divergence dates estimated. It is thus not "the first to approach the debate about the effects of the\
K-Pg extinction event on mammalian evolution using Total Evidence phylogenies" (the Slater study from which the Mammaliaformes dataset was derived does just that, using body mass to quantify a difference in evolutionary mode across the boundary). The estimation of disparity through time is essentially an exercise in inferring ancestral states for morphological characters; thus, using a study that had found deep Cretaceous divergences for placental orders is unlikely to find a substantial change in disparity across the K-Pg. Furthermore, failing to account for rate variation --- which might be expected to be dramatic in the aftermath of a mass extinction --- will result in inaccurate ancestral state reconstructions (see for example Baker 2015, PNAS 112[16]).\
\
The authors only using a single (Maximum Clade Credibility?) tree for each study, rather than performing analyses on the posterior tree sample to integrate over the uncertainty associated with divergence and tip-dates. Perhaps even more importantly, though, the authors do not run their disparity estimation analyses on the version of the eutherian tree where Beck and Lee constrained the diversification of placentals to take place entirely after the K-Pg (perhaps not likely, but nonetheless instructive); those authors found only a ten-fold increase in rates, which is not an implausible figure and highlights the tendency of molecular clock studies---particularly tip-dating ones---to push divergences back in time rather than accommodate substantial intervals of elevated rates, even though this may be biologically realistic given the exceptional circumstances that occur an extinction's aftermath. \
\
The new method presented in the study for quantifying disparity using a continuous 'time-slicing' approach, as the authors contend that standard methods for binning taxa by geological interval are prone to bias (though this is not rigorously demonstrated). However, the new method is untested, and appears to have the tendency to flatten temporal patterns; simulation studies would be needed to verify that the method was performing as expected. \
\
In particular, Figure S6-7 report results for 'traditional' methods of quantifying disparity, including time-binning using geological intervals; these measures (particularly the sum and product of ranges and product of variance) appear to show sharp drops in disparity immediately after the K-Pg that are followed by big jumps towards higher levels. Of course, estimates of disparity based on ranges are more sensitive to outliers, but this is biologically interesting, and not something that should be swept under the carpet: extreme morphologies are important contributors to \'a0ecomorphological variety. Quantifying disparity solely using median distance to the centroid will, unsurprisingly, tend to flatten out the temporal pattern, and downplay the influence of ecologically noteworthy outliers. Additionally, visual comparison of the time-binned and continuous time-slicing methods in Figures S6-7 suggests that the latter are pushing patterns back in time --- peaks that occur long\
after the K-Pg when binned using geological intervals seem to be shifted to at or just before the K-Pg with the continuous method. This may have something to do with the phenomenon noted by the authors in the text whereby long branches extending into the Cretaceous can impact estimates of disparity obtained for the Eocene. This seems undesirable.\
\
Lastly, the authors do not give any consideration to the shortcomings of using discrete morphological character data for quantifying disparity in these of macroevolutionary studies. Character sampling is likely to be a major issue for the Slater dataset (originally based on the Luo et al. 2011 Juramaia dataset), because this matrix does not attempt to sample characters that capture the full extent of morphological variation in the (living) placental families sampled --- merely enough to resolve their relationships satisfactorily; the main goal of the dataset was to place Juramaia in the tree. Importantly, too, the dataset combines species-level data for Mesozoic taxa with family-level data for a select group of extant placentals, which is likely to substantially underplay the morphological variation in the latter relative to the former. Representative sampling of morphological characters across taxonomic groups and through time underpins the entire study, but potential\
deviations from this ideal are not considered.\
\
Based on the conceptual and methodological flaws outlined above --- most importantly the lack of novelty with regards to the datasets used, and the untested nature of the new method for quantifying disparity \'97 I am afraid that I cannot recommend that this paper for publication in Current Biology. If the new time-slicing method of quantifying disparity is subjected to rigorous testing, perhaps via simulations, and a range of divergence-date scenarios compared (e.g., the extreme divergence scenarios evaluated by Beck and Lee's study), it would be appropriate for a more specialist palaeobiological journal.\
\
\
Reviewer #3: While the techniques applied in the analyses sound interesting, I think that the datasets that the authors are using are inadequate to examine the morphological disparity of therian mammals across the K-Pg boundary and through the Cenozoic. There are far to few Cenozoic mammals included in the dataset and the taxa and character matrices were not designed to show the full range of morphology present among Cenozoic mammals and this is probably why the analyses failed to find a significant increase in morphological diversity across the K-Pg boundary and into the Cenozoic.\
\
One minor comment - I think the authors meant "Leptictis" rather than "Lepidictis" (page 9).}